# continents-2-counties
Using machine learning to estimate life expectancy from MOSAIKs satellite imagery at any administrative level. From continents to countries to counties, and beyond.

Life expectancy at birth is an important development indicator, recognized as such by its inclusion in the Human Development Index (HDI), together with income and education. Estimating life expectancy is not trivial as it requires accurate population counts, and timely registration of births and deaths. This proves difficult in developing countries, where many people do not have birth certificates, national IDs, or formal residential addresses. Affordable and reliable methods are therefore needed. One promising development is combining satellite imagery with machine learning (ML). This has been used, for example, to calculate poverty rates, and population density. We show how it can be used to estimate life expectancy for any location on earth. Leveraging MOSAIKS’s prior, heavy-duty lifting of extracting features from satellite imagery, we focus on two continents and 80 countries at multiple administrative levels (0-3). Using only the first 500 MOSAIKS features to limit memory usage, we calculate the mean absolute deviation (MAD) between observed values and model estimates, for out-of-sample predictions. To demonstrate feasibility, we use two different ML methods on an ordinary laptop — PyTorch Tabular’s Gandalf, and Scikit-Learn’s Ridge Regression. Both reveal a high correlation between satellite-imagery-derived features and life expectancy (R2 > 0.85). Gandalf is more accurate (MAD 0.38 vs 2.22). Ridge Regression is faster (seconds vs hours). Gandalf achieves lower error rates than limited prior studies reporting MAD values in the range of 1.03-1.56. Moreover, its predictions do not rely on the quality and availability of existing data, removing a major bottleneck.
